README.md, before:

# device_manager

#### Table of Contents

1. [Description](#description)
1. [What does this module provide?](#what-does-this-module-provide)
1. [Usage](#usage)
1. [Parameters](#parameters)
1. [Orchestration](#orchestration)
1. [Reference](#reference)

## Description

Agentless devices require a proxy Puppet agent to request certificates, collect facts, retrieve and apply catalogs, and store reports. This module manages the configuration files used by the `puppet device` command, installs libraries required by device modules, and provides additional resources for scheduling and orchestrating `puppet device` runs on those proxy Puppet agents.

## What does this module provide?

* Allows for the configuration of devices in `device.conf` via a manifest, Hiera, and/or the Classifier
* Defines a `devices` fact on the proxy Puppet agent identifying the devices for which it is a proxy
* Installs libraries required by associated device modules the proxy Puppet agent
* Provides an option for scheduling of `puppet device` runs on the proxy Puppet agent
* Provides an optional task for orchestration of `puppet device` runs on newer proxy Puppet agents

## Usage

### Install

On the master, install the `device_manager` module:

```bash
puppet module install puppetlabs-device_manager
```

On the master, install the device-specific module associated with each device. For example:

```bash
puppet module install f5-f5
```

```bash
puppet module install puppetlabs-cisco_ios
```

### Configure

You can declare individual devices via a manifest, or multiple devices via Hiera or the Classifier. Using Hiera allows you to encrypt sensitive information, such as passwords, at rest on the master, using the hiera-eyaml backend.

Note: If you declare the same device (identified by name) via Hiera and the Classifier, the declaration in the Classifier takes precedence.

#### Manage individual devices via a manifest:

Declare individual `device_manager` resources via a manifest and apply to the proxy Puppet agent:

```puppet
node 'agent.example.com' {

  device_manager { 'bigip.example.com':
    type         => 'f5',
    url          => 'https://admin:password@10.0.0.245/',
    run_interval => 30,
  }

  device_manager { 'cisco.example.com':
    type        => 'cisco_ios',
    credentials => {
      address         => '10.0.0.246',
      port            => 22,
      username        => 'admin',
      password        => 'password',
      enable_password => 'password',
    },
  }

}
```

#### Manage multiple devices via Hiera:

Declare multiple `device_manager` resources via the `device_manager::devices` key and apply to the proxy Puppet agent via Hiera:

```yaml
---
device_manager::devices:
  bigip1.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.1.245/'
    run_interval: 30
  bigip2.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.2.245/'
    run_interval: 30
  cisco1.example.com:
    type:         'cisco_ios'
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.1.246'
      port:            22
      username:        'admin'
      password:        'password'
      enable_password: 'password'
    run_interval: 60
  cisco2.example.com:
    type:         'cisco_ios'
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.2.246'
      port:            22
      username:        'admin'
      password:        'password'
      enable_password: 'password'
    run_interval: 60
```

Declare the `device_manager::devices` class in a manifest and apply to the proxy Puppet agent:

```puppet
node 'agent.example.com'  {
  include device_manager::devices
}
```

#### Manage multiple devices via the Classifier:

Declare multiple `device_manager` resources, via the `devices` parameter, to the `device_manager::devices` class and apply to the proxy Puppet agent via the Classifier:

```puppet
{
  'bigip1.example.com' => {
    type         => 'f5',
    url          => 'https://admin:password@10.0.1.245/',
    run_interval => 30,
  },
  'bigip2.example.com' => {
    type         => 'f5',
    url          => 'https://admin:password@10.0.2.245/',
    run_interval => 30,
  },
  'cisco1.example.com' => {
    type         => 'cisco_ios'
    credentials  => {
      address         => '10.0.1.246',
      port            => 22,
      username        => 'admin',
      password        => 'password',
      enable_password => 'password',
    },
    run_interval => 60,
  }
  'cisco2.example.com' => {
    type        => 'cisco_ios',
    credentials => {
      address         => '10.0.2.246',
      port            => 22,
      username        => 'admin',
      password        => 'password',
      enable_password => 'password',
    },
    run_interval => 60,
  }
}
```

#### Defaults when managing multiple devices via Hiera or the Classifier:

When using the `device_manager::devices` class, you can declare defaults (for all devices and for each device type) for device parameters via the `device_manager::devices::defaults` key and apply to the proxy Puppet agent via Hiera:

```yaml
device_manager::devices::defaults:
  type:           'cisco_ios'
  run_interval:   45
  f5:
    run_interval: 30
  cisco_ios:
    run_interval: 60
    credentials:
      port:            22
      username:        'admin'
      password:        'password'
      enable_password: 'password'
```

This allows for deduplication of common parameters:

```yaml
---
device_manager::devices:
  bigip1.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.1.245/'
  bigip2.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.2.245/'
  cisco1.example.com:
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.1.246'
  cisco2.example.com:
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.2.246'
```

The order of precedence for parameters and defaults is:

1. The parameter in the resource declaration
1. The default in `device_manager::devices::defaults::<DEVICE TYPE>`
1. The default in `device_manager::devices::defaults`

Hash parameters (such as `credentials`) are merged using the same precedence.

### Run `puppet device`

Declaring these resources will configure `device.conf` and apply the base class (if one is defined) of associated device modules on the proxy Puppet agent, allowing it to execute `puppet device` runs on behalf of its configured devices:

```bash
puppet device --verbose --target bigip.example.com
```

#### Signing certificates

The first run of `puppet device` for a device will generate a certificate request for the device:

```bash
Info: Creating a new SSL key for bigip.example.com
Info: Caching certificate for ca
Info: csr_attributes file loading from /opt/puppetlabs/puppet/cache/devices/bigip.example.com/csr_attributes.yaml
Info: Creating a new SSL certificate request for bigip.example.com
Info: Certificate Request fingerprint (SHA256): ...
Info: Caching certificate for ca
```

Unless [autosign](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/ssl_autosign.html) is enabled, the following (depending upon `waitforcert`) will be output:

```bash
Notice: Did not receive certificate
Notice: Did not receive certificate
Notice: Did not receive certificate
...
```

Or:

```bash
Exiting; no certificate found and waitforcert is disabled
```

On the master, execute the following to sign the certificate for the device:

```bash
puppet cert sign bigip.example.com
```

This will output that the certificate for the device has been signed:

```bash
Signing Certificate Request for:
  "bigip.example.com" (SHA256) ...
Notice: Signed certificate request for bigip.example.com
Notice: Removing file Puppet::SSL::CertificateRequest bigip.example.com at '/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/ssl/ca/requests/bigip.example.com.pem'
```

## Parameters

### name

Data type: String

This parameter is optional, and defaults to the title of the resource.

Specifies the `certname` of the device.

### ensure

Data type: String

This parameter is optional, with valid options of 'present' (the default) and 'absent'.

Setting to 'absent' deletes the device from `device.conf` and the `devices` fact, and negates the effect of any other parameters.

### type

Data type: String

Specifies the type of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent. This identifies the module used to access the device.

### url

Data type: String

This parameter is required for devices that do not use the Puppet Resource API: refer to the associated device module documentation for details regarding its format. The `url` and `credentials` parameters are mutually exclusive.

```puppet
url => 'https://admin:password@10.0.0.245/'
```

Specifies the URL of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent.

### credentials

Data type: Hash

This parameter is required for devices that use the Puppet Resource API: refer to the associated device module documentation for details regarding its format. The `credentials` and `url` parameters are mutually exclusive.

```puppet
credentials => {
  address         => '10.0.0.246',
  port            => 22,
  username        => 'admin',
  password        => 'password',
  enable_password => 'password',
}
```

This saves the credentials of the device in a HOCON file in `confdir/devices` and specifies that file as the `url` of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent.

### debug

Data type: Boolean

This parameter is optional, with a default of false.

Specifies transport-level debugging of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent, and is limited to debugging the telnet and ssh transports.

Note: This parameter specifies the `debug` property defined in: [Config Files: device.conf](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/config_file_device.html) rather than the `--debug` option defined in: [Man Page: puppet device](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/man/device.html).

### include_module

Data type: Boolean

This parameter is optional, with a default of true.

Specifies automatically including the base class (if one is defined) of the associated device module (specified by the `type` parameter) on the proxy Puppet agent. Device modules may implement a base class that applies an `install` class. Including that class will install libraries required by the device module.

### run_interval

Data type: Integer

This parameter is optional, with a default of 0.

Setting `run_interval` to a value between 1 and 1440 will create a Cron (or on Windows, a Scheduled Task) resource for the device that executes `puppet device --target` every `run_interval` minutes (with a randomized offset) on the proxy Puppet agent. When creating a Cron resource, values greater than thirty minutes will be rounded up to the nearest hour.

[comment]: # (Doing so avoids impractical cron mathematics.)

Note: On versions of Puppet (lower than Puppet 5.x.x) that do not support `puppet device --target`, this parameter will instead create one Cron (or Scheduled Task) resource that executes `puppet device` for all devices in `device.conf` every 60 minutes (at a randomized minute) on the proxy Puppet agent.

## Orchestration

### Puppet Tasks

On versions of Puppet Enterprise (2017.3.x or higher) that support Puppet Tasks, this module provides a `device_manager::run_puppet_device` task which can be used by the `puppet task` command to orchestrate a `puppet device` run on the proxy Puppet agent. Help for this task is available via: `puppet task show device_manager::run_puppet_device` command.

#### Examples:

To run `puppet device` for all devices in `device.conf` on the specified proxy Puppet agent:

```bash
puppet task run device_manager::run_puppet_device --nodes 'agent.example.com'
```

To run `puppet device` for all devices in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent identified by a PuppetDB query:

```bash
puppet task run device_manager::run_puppet_device --query 'inventory { facts.devices."bigip.example.com" = true }'
```

To run `puppet device --target` for a specific device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent identified by a PuppetDB query:

```bash
puppet task run device_manager::run_puppet_device --query 'inventory { facts.devices."bigip.example.com" = true }' target=bigip.example.com
```

## Reference

For more information, see:

* [Man Page: puppet device](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/man/device.html)
* [Config Files: device.conf](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/config_file_device.html)
* [Running Tasks](https://puppet.com/docs/pe/latest/orchestrator/running_tasks.html)

Commit message:

(MODULES-9191) support configurable user
Allow specification of a user and group for conf files,
add use that user for any cron jobs.

Since this user and group are used for a parent folder,
this is not a per-device setting, so via Hiera.

README.md, after:

# device_manager

#### Table of Contents

1. [Description](#description)
1. [What does this module provide?](#what-does-this-module-provide)
1. [Usage](#usage)
1. [Parameters](#parameters)
1. [Orchestration](#orchestration)
1. [Reference](#reference)

## Description

Agentless devices require a proxy Puppet agent to request certificates, collect facts, retrieve and apply catalogs, and store reports. This module manages the configuration files used by the `puppet device` command, installs libraries required by device modules, and provides additional resources for scheduling and orchestrating `puppet device` runs on those proxy Puppet agents.

## What does this module provide?

* Allows for the configuration of devices in `device.conf` via a manifest, Hiera, and/or the Classifier
* Defines a `devices` fact on the proxy Puppet agent identifying the devices for which it is a proxy
* Installs libraries required by associated device modules the proxy Puppet agent
* Provides an option for scheduling of `puppet device` runs on the proxy Puppet agent
* Provides an optional task for orchestration of `puppet device` runs on newer proxy Puppet agents

## Usage

### Install

On the master, install the `device_manager` module:

```bash
puppet module install puppetlabs-device_manager
```

On the master, install the device-specific module associated with each device. For example:

```bash
puppet module install f5-f5
```

```bash
puppet module install puppetlabs-cisco_ios
```

### Configure

You can declare individual devices via a manifest, or multiple devices via Hiera or the Classifier. Using Hiera allows you to encrypt sensitive information, such as passwords, at rest on the master, using the hiera-eyaml backend.

Note: If you declare the same device (identified by name) via Hiera and the Classifier, the declaration in the Classifier takes precedence.

#### Manage individual devices via a manifest:

Declare individual `device_manager` resources via a manifest and apply to the proxy Puppet agent:

```puppet
node 'agent.example.com' {

  device_manager { 'bigip.example.com':
    type         => 'f5',
    url          => 'https://admin:password@10.0.0.245/',
    run_interval => 30,
  }

  device_manager { 'cisco.example.com':
    type        => 'cisco_ios',
    credentials => {
      address         => '10.0.0.246',
      port            => 22,
      username        => 'admin',
      password        => 'password',
      enable_password => 'password',
    },
  }

}
```

#### Manage multiple devices via Hiera:

Declare multiple `device_manager` resources via the `device_manager::devices` key and apply to the proxy Puppet agent via Hiera:

```yaml
---
device_manager::devices:
  bigip1.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.1.245/'
    run_interval: 30
  bigip2.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.2.245/'
    run_interval: 30
  cisco1.example.com:
    type:         'cisco_ios'
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.1.246'
      port:            22
      username:        'admin'
      password:        'password'
      enable_password: 'password'
    run_interval: 60
  cisco2.example.com:
    type:         'cisco_ios'
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.2.246'
      port:            22
      username:        'admin'
      password:        'password'
      enable_password: 'password'
    run_interval: 60
```

Declare the `device_manager::devices` class in a manifest and apply to the proxy Puppet agent:

```puppet
node 'agent.example.com'  {
  include device_manager::devices
}
```

#### Manage multiple devices via the Classifier:

Declare multiple `device_manager` resources, via the `devices` parameter, to the `device_manager::devices` class and apply to the proxy Puppet agent via the Classifier:

```puppet
{
  'bigip1.example.com' => {
    type         => 'f5',
    url          => 'https://admin:password@10.0.1.245/',
    run_interval => 30,
  },
  'bigip2.example.com' => {
    type         => 'f5',
    url          => 'https://admin:password@10.0.2.245/',
    run_interval => 30,
  },
  'cisco1.example.com' => {
    type         => 'cisco_ios'
    credentials  => {
      address         => '10.0.1.246',
      port            => 22,
      username        => 'admin',
      password        => 'password',
      enable_password => 'password',
    },
    run_interval => 60,
  }
  'cisco2.example.com' => {
    type        => 'cisco_ios',
    credentials => {
      address         => '10.0.2.246',
      port            => 22,
      username        => 'admin',
      password        => 'password',
      enable_password => 'password',
    },
    run_interval => 60,
  }
}
```

#### Defaults when managing multiple devices via Hiera or the Classifier:

When using the `device_manager::devices` class, you can declare defaults (for all devices and for each device type) for device parameters via the `device_manager::devices::defaults` key and apply to the proxy Puppet agent via Hiera:

```yaml
device_manager::devices::defaults:
  type:           'cisco_ios'
  run_interval:   45
  f5:
    run_interval: 30
  cisco_ios:
    run_interval: 60
    credentials:
      port:            22
      username:        'admin'
      password:        'password'
      enable_password: 'password'
```

This allows for deduplication of common parameters:

```yaml
---
device_manager::devices:
  bigip1.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.1.245/'
  bigip2.example.com:
    type:         'f5'
    url:          'https://admin:password@10.0.2.245/'
  cisco1.example.com:
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.1.246'
  cisco2.example.com:
    credentials:
      address:    '10.0.2.246'
```

The order of precedence for parameters and defaults is:

1. The parameter in the resource declaration
1. The default in `device_manager::devices::defaults::<DEVICE TYPE>`
1. The default in `device_manager::devices::defaults`

Hash parameters (such as `credentials`) are merged using the same precedence.

### Run `puppet device`

Declaring these resources will configure `device.conf` and apply the base class (if one is defined) of associated device modules on the proxy Puppet agent, allowing it to execute `puppet device` runs on behalf of its configured devices:

```bash
puppet device --verbose --target bigip.example.com
```

#### Signing certificates

The first run of `puppet device` for a device will generate a certificate request for the device:

```bash
Info: Creating a new SSL key for bigip.example.com
Info: Caching certificate for ca
Info: csr_attributes file loading from /opt/puppetlabs/puppet/cache/devices/bigip.example.com/csr_attributes.yaml
Info: Creating a new SSL certificate request for bigip.example.com
Info: Certificate Request fingerprint (SHA256): ...
Info: Caching certificate for ca
```

Unless [autosign](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/ssl_autosign.html) is enabled, the following (depending upon `waitforcert`) will be output:

```bash
Notice: Did not receive certificate
Notice: Did not receive certificate
Notice: Did not receive certificate
...
```

Or:

```bash
Exiting; no certificate found and waitforcert is disabled
```

On the master, execute the following to sign the certificate for the device:

```bash
puppet cert sign bigip.example.com
```

This will output that the certificate for the device has been signed:

```bash
Signing Certificate Request for:
  "bigip.example.com" (SHA256) ...
Notice: Signed certificate request for bigip.example.com
Notice: Removing file Puppet::SSL::CertificateRequest bigip.example.com at '/etc/puppetlabs/puppet/ssl/ca/requests/bigip.example.com.pem'
```

## Parameters

### name

Data type: String

This parameter is optional, and defaults to the title of the resource.

Specifies the `certname` of the device.

### ensure

Data type: String

This parameter is optional, with valid options of 'present' (the default) and 'absent'.

Setting to 'absent' deletes the device from `device.conf` and the `devices` fact, and negates the effect of any other parameters.

### type

Data type: String

Specifies the type of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent. This identifies the module used to access the device.

### url

Data type: String

This parameter is required for devices that do not use the Puppet Resource API: refer to the associated device module documentation for details regarding its format. The `url` and `credentials` parameters are mutually exclusive.

```puppet
url => 'https://admin:password@10.0.0.245/'
```

Specifies the URL of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent.

### credentials

Data type: Hash

This parameter is required for devices that use the Puppet Resource API: refer to the associated device module documentation for details regarding its format. The `credentials` and `url` parameters are mutually exclusive.

```puppet
credentials => {
  address         => '10.0.0.246',
  port            => 22,
  username        => 'admin',
  password        => 'password',
  enable_password => 'password',
}
```

This saves the credentials of the device in a HOCON file in `confdir/devices` and specifies that file as the `url` of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent.

### debug

Data type: Boolean

This parameter is optional, with a default of false.

Specifies transport-level debugging of the device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent, and is limited to debugging the telnet and ssh transports.

Note: This parameter specifies the `debug` property defined in: [Config Files: device.conf](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/config_file_device.html) rather than the `--debug` option defined in: [Man Page: puppet device](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/man/device.html).

### include_module

Data type: Boolean

This parameter is optional, with a default of true.

Specifies automatically including the base class (if one is defined) of the associated device module (specified by the `type` parameter) on the proxy Puppet agent. Device modules may implement a base class that applies an `install` class. Including that class will install libraries required by the device module.

### run_interval

Data type: Integer

This parameter is optional, with a default of 0.

Setting `run_interval` to a value between 1 and 1440 will create a Cron (or on Windows, a Scheduled Task) resource for the device that executes `puppet device --target` every `run_interval` minutes (with a randomized offset) on the proxy Puppet agent. When creating a Cron resource, values greater than thirty minutes will be rounded up to the nearest hour.

[comment]: # (Doing so avoids impractical cron mathematics.)

Note: On versions of Puppet (lower than Puppet 5.x.x) that do not support `puppet device --target`, this parameter will instead create one Cron (or Scheduled Task) resource that executes `puppet device` for all devices in `device.conf` every 60 minutes (at a randomized minute) on the proxy Puppet agent.

### run_user

Data type: String

This parameter is optional, with a default of `$::identity['user']`.

Specifies the user to own the configuration files and any cron jobs on the proxy Puppet agent.

## Orchestration

### Puppet Tasks

On versions of Puppet Enterprise (2017.3.x or higher) that support Puppet Tasks, this module provides a `device_manager::run_puppet_device` task which can be used by the `puppet task` command to orchestrate a `puppet device` run on the proxy Puppet agent. Help for this task is available via: `puppet task show device_manager::run_puppet_device` command.

#### Examples:

To run `puppet device` for all devices in `device.conf` on the specified proxy Puppet agent:

```bash
puppet task run device_manager::run_puppet_device --nodes 'agent.example.com'
```

To run `puppet device` for all devices in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent identified by a PuppetDB query:

```bash
puppet task run device_manager::run_puppet_device --query 'inventory { facts.devices."bigip.example.com" = true }'
```

To run `puppet device --target` for a specific device in `device.conf` on the proxy Puppet agent identified by a PuppetDB query:

```bash
puppet task run device_manager::run_puppet_device --query 'inventory { facts.devices."bigip.example.com" = true }' target=bigip.example.com
```

## Reference

For more information, see:

* [Man Page: puppet device](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/man/device.html)
* [Config Files: device.conf](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/config_file_device.html)
* [Running Tasks](https://puppet.com/docs/pe/latest/orchestrator/running_tasks.html)
